README.md, before:

# Metta AI

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://codecov.io/gh/Metta-AI/metta">
    <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Metta-AI/metta/graph/badge.svg?token=SX28I8PS3E" alt="codecov">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta/actions/workflows/checks.yml">
    <img src="https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta/actions/workflows/checks.yml/badge.svg" alt="Tests">
  </a>
  <a href="https://discord.gg/secret-hologenesis">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/1309708848730345493?logo=discord&logoColor=white&label=Discord" alt="Discord">
  </a>
  <a href="LICENSE">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg" alt="License">
  </a>
  <a href="https://deepwiki.com/Metta-AI/metta">
    <img src="https://deepwiki.com/badge.svg" alt="Ask DeepWiki">
  </a>
</p>

A reinforcement learning codebase focusing on the emergence of cooperation and alignment in multi-agent AI systems.

- **Discord**: <https://discord.gg/mQzrgwqmwy>
- **Short (5m) Talk**: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bt6hV73VA8I>
- **Talk**: <https://foresight.org/summary/david-bloomin-metta-learning-love-is-all-you-need/>

## What is Metta Learning?

<p align="middle">
<img src="docs/readme_showoff.gif" alt="Metta learning example video">
<br>
<a href="https://metta-ai.github.io/metta/?replayUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fsoftmax-public.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com%2Freplays%2Fandre_pufferbox_33%2Freplay.77200.json.z&play=true">Interactive demo</a>
</p>

Metta AI is an open-source research project investigating the emergence of cooperation and alignment in multi-agent AI
systems. By creating a model organism for complex multi-agent gridworld environments, the project aims to study the
impact of social dynamics, such as kinship and mate selection, on learning and cooperative behaviors of AI agents.

Metta AI explores the hypothesis that social dynamics, akin to love in biological systems, play a crucial role in the
development of cooperative AGI and AI alignment. The project introduces a novel reward-sharing mechanism mimicking
familial bonds and mate selection, allowing researchers to observe the evolution of complex social behaviors and
cooperation among AI agents. By investigating this concept in a controlled multi-agent setting, the project seeks to
contribute to the broader discussion on the path towards safe and beneficial AGI.

## Introduction

Metta is a simulation environment (game) designed to train AI agents capable of meta-learning general intelligence. The
core idea is to create an environment where incremental intelligence is rewarded, fostering the development of generally
intelligent agents.

### Motivation and Approach

1. **Agents and Environment**: Agents are shaped by their environment, learning policies that enhance their fitness. To
   develop general intelligence, agents need an environment where increasing intelligence is continually rewarded.

2. **Competitive and Cooperative Dynamics**: A game with multiple agents and some competition creates an evolving
   environment where challenges increase with agent intelligence. Purely competitive games often reach a Nash
   equilibrium, where locally optimal strategies are hard to deviate from. Adding cooperative dynamics introduces more
   behavioral possibilities and smooths the behavioral space.

3. **Kinship Structures**: The game features a flexible kinship structure, simulating a range of relationships from
   close kin to strangers. Agents must learn to coordinate with close kin, negotiate with more distant kin, and compete
   with strangers. This diverse social environment encourages continuous learning and intelligence growth.

The game is designed to evolve with the agents, providing unlimited learning opportunities despite simple rules.

### Game Overview

The current version of the game can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/metta-ai/baseline.v0.1.0). It's a grid world
with the following dynamics:

- **Agents and Vision**: Agents can see a limited number of squares around them.
- **Resources**: Agents harvest diamonds, convert them to energy at charger stations, and use energy to power the "heart
  altar" for rewards.
- **Energy Management**: All actions cost energy, so agents learn to manage their energy budgets efficiently.
- **Combat**: Agents can attack others, temporarily freezing the target and stealing resources.
- **Defense**: Agents can toggle shields, which drain energy but absorb attacks.
- **Cooperation**: Agents can share energy or resources and use markers to communicate.

### Exploration and Expansion

The game offers numerous possibilities for exploration, including:

1. **Diverse Energy Profiles**: Assigning different energy profiles to agents, essentially giving them different bodies
   and policies.
2. **Dynamic Energy Profiles**: Allowing agents to change their energy profiles, reflecting different postures or
   emotions.
3. **Resource Types and Conversions**: Introducing different resource types and conversion mechanisms.
4. **Environment Modification**: Enabling agents to modify the game board by creating, destroying, or altering objects.

### Kinship and Social Dynamics

The game explores various kinship structures:

1. **Random Kinship Scores**: Each pair of agents has a kinship score sampled from a distribution.
2. **Teams**: Agents belong to teams with symmetric kinship among team members.
3. **Hives/Clans/Families**: Structuring agents into larger kinship groups.

Future plans include incorporating mate-selection dynamics, where agents share future rewards at a cost, potentially
leading to intelligence gains through a signaling arms race.

Metta aims to create a rich, evolving environment where AI agents can develop general intelligence through continuous
learning and adaptation.

## Research Explorations

The project's modular design and open-source nature make it easy for researchers to adapt and extend the platform to
investigate their own hypotheses in this domain. The highly performant, open-ended game rules provide a rich environment
for studying these behaviors and their potential implications for AI alignment.

Some areas of research interest:

#### 1. Environment Development

Develop rich and diverse gridworld environments with complex dynamics, such as resource systems, agent diversity,
procedural terrain generation, support for various environment types, population dynamics, and kinship schemes.

#### 2. Agent Architecture Research

Incorporate techniques like dense learning signals, surprise minimization, exploration strategies, and blending
reinforcement and imitation learning.

#### 3. Scalable Training Infrastructure

Investigate scalable training approaches, including distributed reinforcement learning, student-teacher architectures,
and blending reinforcement learning with imitation learning, to enable efficient training of large-scale multi-agent
systems.

#### 4. Intelligence Evaluations for Gridworld Agents

Design and implement a comprehensive suite of intelligence evaluations for gridworld agents, covering navigation tasks,
maze solving, in-context learning, cooperation, and competition scenarios.

#### 5. DevOps and Tooling

Develop tools and infrastructure for efficient management, tracking, and deployment of experiments, such as cloud
cluster management, experiment tracking and visualization, and continuous integration and deployment pipelines.

This README provides only a brief overview of research explorations. Visit the
[research roadmap](https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta/blob/main/roadmap.md) for more details.

## Installation

### Quick Start

Clone the repository and run the setup:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta.git
cd metta
./install.sh  # Interactive setup - installs uv, configures metta, and installs components
```

After installation, you can use metta commands directly:

```bash
metta status       # Check component status
metta install      # Install additional components
metta configure    # Reconfigure for a different profile
```

#### Additional installation options

```
./install.sh --profile=softmax   # For Softmax employees
./install.sh --profile=external  # For external collaborators
./install.sh --help             # Show all available options
```

## Usage

The repository contains command-line tools in the `tools/` directory. Most of these tools use [Hydra](https://hydra.cc/)
for configuration management, which allows flexible parameter overrides and composition.

- **Override parameters**: `param=value` sets configuration values directly
- **Compose configs**: `+group=option` loads additional configuration files from `configs/group/option.yaml`
- **Use config groups**: Load user-specific settings with `+user=<name>` from `configs/user/<name>.yaml`

### Training a Model

```bash
./tools/train.py run=my_experiment +hardware=macbook wandb=off +user=<name>
```

Parameters:

- `run=my_experiment` - Names your experiment and controls where checkpoints are saved under `train_dir/<run>`
- `+hardware=macbook` - Loads hardware-specific settings from `configs/hardware/macbook.yaml`
- `wandb=off` - Disables Weights & Biases logging
- `+user=<name>` - Loads your personal settings from `configs/user/<name>.yaml`

### Setting up Weights & Biases for Personal Use

To use WandB with your personal account:

1. Get your WandB API key from [wandb.ai](https://wandb.ai) (click your profile → API keys)
2. Add it to your `~/.netrc` file:
   ```
   machine api.wandb.ai
     login user
     password YOUR_API_KEY_HERE
   ```
3. Edit `configs/wandb/external_user.yaml` and replace `???` with your WandB username:
   ```yaml
   entity: ??? # Replace with your WandB username
   ```

Now you can run training with your personal WandB config:

```
./tools/train.py run=local.yourname.123 +hardware=macbook wandb=user
```

## Visualizing a Model

### Mettascope: in-browser viewer

Mettascope allows you to run and view episodes in the environment you specify. It goes beyond just spectator mode, and
allows taking over an agent and controlling it manually.

For more information, see [./mettascope/README.md](./mettascope/README.md).

#### Run the interactive simulation

```bash
./tools/play.py run=<name> [options]
```

Arguments:

- `run=<name>` - **Required**. Experiment identifier
- `policy_uri=<path>` - Specify the policy the models follow when not manually controller with a model checkpoint (`.pt`
  file).
  - For local files, supply the path: `./train_dir/<run_name>/checkpoints/<checkpoint_name>.pt`. These checkpoint files
    are created during training
  - For wandb artifacts, prefix with `wandb://`
- `+hardware=<config>` - Hardware configuration (see [Training a Model](#training-a-model))

### Run the terminal simulation

```
./tools/renderer.py run=demo_obstacles \
renderer_job.environment.root.params.uri="configs/env/mettagrid/maps/debug/simple_obstacles.map"
```

### Evaluating a Model

When you run training, if you have WandB enabled, then you will be able to see in your WandB run page results for the
eval suites.

However, this will not apply for anything trained before April 8th.

#### Post Hoc Evaluation

If you want to run evaluation post-training to compare different policies, you can do the following:

To add your policy to the existing navigation evals DB:

```
./tools/sim.py \
    sim=navigation \
    run=navigation101 \
    policy_uri=wandb://run/YOUR_POLICY_URI \
    sim_job.stats_db_uri=wandb://stats/navigation_db \
    device=cpu
```

This will run your policy through the `configs/eval/navigation` eval_suite and then save it to the `navigation_db`
artifact on WandB.

Then, to see the results in the heatmap along with the other policies in the database, you can run:

```
./tools/dashboard.py +eval_db_uri=wandb://stats/navigation_db run=navigation_db ++dashboard.output_path=s3://softmax-public/policydash/navigation.html
```

## Development Setup

To run the style checks and tests locally:

```bash
ruff format
ruff check
pyright metta  # optional, some stubs are missing
pytest
```

Running these commands mirrors our CI configuration and helps keep the codebase consistent.

## Third-party Content

Some sample map patterns in `scenes/dcss` were adapted from the open-source game
[Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup (DCSS)](https://github.com/crawl/crawl), specifically from the file
[`simple.des`](https://github.com/crawl/crawl/blob/master/crawl-ref/source/dat/des/arrival/simple.des).

DCSS is licensed under the [GNU General Public License v2.0](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html).

Commit message:

Add stable tag workflow with comprehensive testing and dashboard
Co-authored-by: richard <richard@stem.ai>

README.md, after:

# Metta AI

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://codecov.io/gh/Metta-AI/metta">
    <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Metta-AI/metta/graph/badge.svg?token=SX28I8PS3E" alt="codecov">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta/actions/workflows/checks.yml">
    <img src="https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta/actions/workflows/checks.yml/badge.svg" alt="Tests">
  </a>
  <a href="https://discord.gg/secret-hologenesis">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/1309708848730345493?logo=discord&logoColor=white&label=Discord" alt="Discord">
  </a>
  <a href="LICENSE">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg" alt="License">
  </a>
  <a href="https://deepwiki.com/Metta-AI/metta">
    <img src="https://deepwiki.com/badge.svg" alt="Ask DeepWiki">
  </a>
</p>

A reinforcement learning codebase focusing on the emergence of cooperation and alignment in multi-agent AI systems.

- **Discord**: <https://discord.gg/mQzrgwqmwy>
- **Short (5m) Talk**: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bt6hV73VA8I>
- **Talk**: <https://foresight.org/summary/david-bloomin-metta-learning-love-is-all-you-need/>

## What is Metta Learning?

<p align="middle">
<img src="docs/readme_showoff.gif" alt="Metta learning example video">
<br>
<a href="https://metta-ai.github.io/metta/?replayUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fsoftmax-public.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com%2Freplays%2Fandre_pufferbox_33%2Freplay.77200.json.z&play=true">Interactive demo</a>
</p>

Metta AI is an open-source research project investigating the emergence of cooperation and alignment in multi-agent AI
systems. By creating a model organism for complex multi-agent gridworld environments, the project aims to study the
impact of social dynamics, such as kinship and mate selection, on learning and cooperative behaviors of AI agents.

Metta AI explores the hypothesis that social dynamics, akin to love in biological systems, play a crucial role in the
development of cooperative AGI and AI alignment. The project introduces a novel reward-sharing mechanism mimicking
familial bonds and mate selection, allowing researchers to observe the evolution of complex social behaviors and
cooperation among AI agents. By investigating this concept in a controlled multi-agent setting, the project seeks to
contribute to the broader discussion on the path towards safe and beneficial AGI.

## Introduction

Metta is a simulation environment (game) designed to train AI agents capable of meta-learning general intelligence. The
core idea is to create an environment where incremental intelligence is rewarded, fostering the development of generally
intelligent agents.

## Using the Stable Version

For production use, we recommend using the `stable` tag which points to a thoroughly tested version:

```bash
# Clone and checkout the stable version
git clone https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta.git
cd metta
git checkout stable
```

The stable tag is automatically advanced after comprehensive testing on the main branch, including:
- Full test suite with integration tests
- Performance benchmarks (no regressions >10%)
- Config validation
- Example training scripts

For details about the stable release process, see [Stable Tag Advancement](docs/workflows/stable-tag-advancement.md) and the [Stability Dashboard](docs/stability/dashboard.md).

### Motivation and Approach

1. **Agents and Environment**: Agents are shaped by their environment, learning policies that enhance their fitness. To
   develop general intelligence, agents need an environment where increasing intelligence is continually rewarded.

2. **Competitive and Cooperative Dynamics**: A game with multiple agents and some competition creates an evolving
   environment where challenges increase with agent intelligence. Purely competitive games often reach a Nash
   equilibrium, where locally optimal strategies are hard to deviate from. Adding cooperative dynamics introduces more
   behavioral possibilities and smooths the behavioral space.

3. **Kinship Structures**: The game features a flexible kinship structure, simulating a range of relationships from
   close kin to strangers. Agents must learn to coordinate with close kin, negotiate with more distant kin, and compete
   with strangers. This diverse social environment encourages continuous learning and intelligence growth.

The game is designed to evolve with the agents, providing unlimited learning opportunities despite simple rules.

### Game Overview

The current version of the game can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/metta-ai/baseline.v0.1.0). It's a grid world
with the following dynamics:

- **Agents and Vision**: Agents can see a limited number of squares around them.
- **Resources**: Agents harvest diamonds, convert them to energy at charger stations, and use energy to power the "heart
  altar" for rewards.
- **Energy Management**: All actions cost energy, so agents learn to manage their energy budgets efficiently.
- **Combat**: Agents can attack others, temporarily freezing the target and stealing resources.
- **Defense**: Agents can toggle shields, which drain energy but absorb attacks.
- **Cooperation**: Agents can share energy or resources and use markers to communicate.

### Exploration and Expansion

The game offers numerous possibilities for exploration, including:

1. **Diverse Energy Profiles**: Assigning different energy profiles to agents, essentially giving them different bodies
   and policies.
2. **Dynamic Energy Profiles**: Allowing agents to change their energy profiles, reflecting different postures or
   emotions.
3. **Resource Types and Conversions**: Introducing different resource types and conversion mechanisms.
4. **Environment Modification**: Enabling agents to modify the game board by creating, destroying, or altering objects.

### Kinship and Social Dynamics

The game explores various kinship structures:

1. **Random Kinship Scores**: Each pair of agents has a kinship score sampled from a distribution.
2. **Teams**: Agents belong to teams with symmetric kinship among team members.
3. **Hives/Clans/Families**: Structuring agents into larger kinship groups.

Future plans include incorporating mate-selection dynamics, where agents share future rewards at a cost, potentially
leading to intelligence gains through a signaling arms race.

Metta aims to create a rich, evolving environment where AI agents can develop general intelligence through continuous
learning and adaptation.

## Research Explorations

The project's modular design and open-source nature make it easy for researchers to adapt and extend the platform to
investigate their own hypotheses in this domain. The highly performant, open-ended game rules provide a rich environment
for studying these behaviors and their potential implications for AI alignment.

Some areas of research interest:

#### 1. Environment Development

Develop rich and diverse gridworld environments with complex dynamics, such as resource systems, agent diversity,
procedural terrain generation, support for various environment types, population dynamics, and kinship schemes.

#### 2. Agent Architecture Research

Incorporate techniques like dense learning signals, surprise minimization, exploration strategies, and blending
reinforcement and imitation learning.

#### 3. Scalable Training Infrastructure

Investigate scalable training approaches, including distributed reinforcement learning, student-teacher architectures,
and blending reinforcement learning with imitation learning, to enable efficient training of large-scale multi-agent
systems.

#### 4. Intelligence Evaluations for Gridworld Agents

Design and implement a comprehensive suite of intelligence evaluations for gridworld agents, covering navigation tasks,
maze solving, in-context learning, cooperation, and competition scenarios.

#### 5. DevOps and Tooling

Develop tools and infrastructure for efficient management, tracking, and deployment of experiments, such as cloud
cluster management, experiment tracking and visualization, and continuous integration and deployment pipelines.

This README provides only a brief overview of research explorations. Visit the
[research roadmap](https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta/blob/main/roadmap.md) for more details.

## Installation

### Quick Start

Clone the repository and run the setup:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Metta-AI/metta.git
cd metta
./install.sh  # Interactive setup - installs uv, configures metta, and installs components
```

After installation, you can use metta commands directly:

```bash
metta status       # Check component status
metta install      # Install additional components
metta configure    # Reconfigure for a different profile
```

#### Additional installation options

```
./install.sh --profile=softmax   # For Softmax employees
./install.sh --profile=external  # For external collaborators
./install.sh --help             # Show all available options
```

## Usage

The repository contains command-line tools in the `tools/` directory. Most of these tools use [Hydra](https://hydra.cc/)
for configuration management, which allows flexible parameter overrides and composition.

- **Override parameters**: `param=value` sets configuration values directly
- **Compose configs**: `+group=option` loads additional configuration files from `configs/group/option.yaml`
- **Use config groups**: Load user-specific settings with `+user=<name>` from `configs/user/<name>.yaml`

### Training a Model

```bash
./tools/train.py run=my_experiment +hardware=macbook wandb=off +user=<name>
```

Parameters:

- `run=my_experiment` - Names your experiment and controls where checkpoints are saved under `train_dir/<run>`
- `+hardware=macbook` - Loads hardware-specific settings from `configs/hardware/macbook.yaml`
- `wandb=off` - Disables Weights & Biases logging
- `+user=<name>` - Loads your personal settings from `configs/user/<name>.yaml`

### Setting up Weights & Biases for Personal Use

To use WandB with your personal account:

1. Get your WandB API key from [wandb.ai](https://wandb.ai) (click your profile → API keys)
2. Add it to your `~/.netrc` file:
   ```
   machine api.wandb.ai
     login user
     password YOUR_API_KEY_HERE
   ```
3. Edit `configs/wandb/external_user.yaml` and replace `???` with your WandB username:
   ```yaml
   entity: ??? # Replace with your WandB username
   ```

Now you can run training with your personal WandB config:

```
./tools/train.py run=local.yourname.123 +hardware=macbook wandb=user
```

## Visualizing a Model

### Mettascope: in-browser viewer

Mettascope allows you to run and view episodes in the environment you specify. It goes beyond just spectator mode, and
allows taking over an agent and controlling it manually.

For more information, see [./mettascope/README.md](./mettascope/README.md).

#### Run the interactive simulation

```bash
./tools/play.py run=<name> [options]
```

Arguments:

- `run=<name>` - **Required**. Experiment identifier
- `policy_uri=<path>` - Specify the policy the models follow when not manually controller with a model checkpoint (`.pt`
  file).
  - For local files, supply the path: `./train_dir/<run_name>/checkpoints/<checkpoint_name>.pt`. These checkpoint files
    are created during training
  - For wandb artifacts, prefix with `wandb://`
- `+hardware=<config>` - Hardware configuration (see [Training a Model](#training-a-model))

### Run the terminal simulation

```
./tools/renderer.py run=demo_obstacles \
renderer_job.environment.root.params.uri="configs/env/mettagrid/maps/debug/simple_obstacles.map"
```

### Evaluating a Model

When you run training, if you have WandB enabled, then you will be able to see in your WandB run page results for the
eval suites.

However, this will not apply for anything trained before April 8th.

#### Post Hoc Evaluation

If you want to run evaluation post-training to compare different policies, you can do the following:

To add your policy to the existing navigation evals DB:

```
./tools/sim.py \
    sim=navigation \
    run=navigation101 \
    policy_uri=wandb://run/YOUR_POLICY_URI \
    sim_job.stats_db_uri=wandb://stats/navigation_db \
    device=cpu
```

This will run your policy through the `configs/eval/navigation` eval_suite and then save it to the `navigation_db`
artifact on WandB.

Then, to see the results in the heatmap along with the other policies in the database, you can run:

```
./tools/dashboard.py +eval_db_uri=wandb://stats/navigation_db run=navigation_db ++dashboard.output_path=s3://softmax-public/policydash/navigation.html
```

## Development Setup

To run the style checks and tests locally:

```bash
ruff format
ruff check
pyright metta  # optional, some stubs are missing
pytest
```

Running these commands mirrors our CI configuration and helps keep the codebase consistent.

## Third-party Content

Some sample map patterns in `scenes/dcss` were adapted from the open-source game
[Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup (DCSS)](https://github.com/crawl/crawl), specifically from the file
[`simple.des`](https://github.com/crawl/crawl/blob/master/crawl-ref/source/dat/des/arrival/simple.des).

DCSS is licensed under the [GNU General Public License v2.0](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html).
