gridworks/README.md, before:

# Gridworks – Developer Guide

This directory contains the Next.js frontend for viewing and editing the environments and maps. The Next.js app relies on the `metta.gridworks.server` FastAPI server. A convenience launcher (`gridworks/start.py`) boots both servers in one command and opens the app in your browser.

The project is designed to be run locally.

## Prerequisites

1. **Node.js** – 22+
2. **pnpm** – run `corepack enable` once on your machine if you don't have it installed.

## First-time setup

```bash
# Install frontend deps
cd gridworks
pnpm install

# Generate the character-encoding lookup table used by the map viewer
pnpm run gen:encoding
```

`gen:encoding` calls a small Python snippet in the `mettagrid` package and writes the resulting JSON file to `src/lib/encoding.json`. Run it again whenever you change the encoder definitions.

## Running the app

From the repository root run:

```bash
./gridworks/start.py
```

The launcher will:

1. Build the frontend code if needed.
2. Start the **backend** (`metta.gridworks.server`).
3. Start the **Next.js** dev server via `pnpm start` (or `pnpm dev` if you use `--dev` flag).
4. Stream colored logs for both processes, prefixing them with `[BACKEND]` and `[FRONTEND]`.
5. Open `http://localhost:3000`.

Use `./gridworks/start.py --dev` to run the app in development mode. This will start the Next.js dev server that will automatically reload when you make changes to the code.

Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> in the terminal to shut everything down.

## Useful commands

```bash
pnpm dev                    # Next.js dev server only (if you want it without the backend)
uv run -m metta.gridworks.server  # Start the backend server only
pnpm run gen:encoding       # Regenerate encoding.json based on `metta.mettagrid.char_encoder` package.
```

Commit message:

gridworks: correctly classify curriculums vs maps

gridworks/README.md, after:

# Gridworks – Developer Guide

This directory contains the Next.js frontend for viewing and editing the environments and maps. The Next.js app relies on the `metta.gridworks.server` FastAPI server. A convenience launcher (`gridworks/start.py`) boots both servers in one command and opens the app in your browser.

The project is designed to be run locally.

## Prerequisites

1. **Node.js** – 22+
2. **pnpm** – run `corepack enable` once on your machine if you don't have it installed.

## First-time setup

```bash
# Install frontend deps
cd gridworks
pnpm install

# Generate the character-encoding lookup table used by the map viewer
pnpm run gen:encoding
```

`gen:encoding` calls a small Python snippet in the `mettagrid` package and writes the resulting JSON file to `src/lib/encoding.json`. Run it again whenever you change the encoder definitions.

## File System Access

Gridworks accesses your local file system through the FastAPI backend server (`metta/metta/gridworks/server.py`). The backend:

- Scans the `configs/env/mettagrid/` directory for YAML configuration files
- Categorizes files as "env", "curriculum", "map", or "unknown" based on their content and path
- Provides REST API endpoints that the Next.js frontend calls to display and interact with these files
- Can read and parse YAML files to extract map configurations and generate previews

The backend runs on port 8001 and communicates with the frontend running on port 3000.

## Running the app

From the repository root run:

```bash
./gridworks/start.py
```

The launcher will:

1. Build the frontend code if needed.
2. Start the **backend** (`metta.gridworks.server`).
3. Start the **Next.js** dev server via `pnpm start` (or `pnpm dev` if you use `--dev` flag).
4. Stream colored logs for both processes, prefixing them with `[BACKEND]` and `[FRONTEND]`.
5. Open `http://localhost:3000`.

Use `./gridworks/start.py --dev` to run the app in development mode. This will start the Next.js dev server that will automatically reload when you make changes to the code.

Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> in the terminal to shut everything down.

## Useful commands

```bash
pnpm dev                    # Next.js dev server only (if you want it without the backend)
uv run -m metta.gridworks.server  # Start the backend server only
pnpm run gen:encoding       # Regenerate encoding.json based on `metta.mettagrid.char_encoder` package.
```
